added response letter (#163)
RConsortium/submissions-pilot3-adam: vignettes/response-FDA IR-pilot3.qmd

---
title: |
   | R Consortium R Submission Working Group
   | Pilot 3
   |
   | Health Authority Request
   |
subtitle: "\nResponse to FDA Information Request"
format: 
  pdf:
    toc: false
    number-sections: true
    include-before:
      - '\newpage{}'
editor: source
---

{{< pagebreak >}}

> ![](images/RConsortium_Horizontal_Pantone.png){width="228"}

Author: This image is missing?

Reviewer: It seems so, @laxamanaj can we add this image?

Reviewer 2: Apologies.  I have pushed the images to the remote branch.  It was still in my local.  When you re-render now it should look like this : 
![image](https://github.com/RConsortium/submissions-pilot3-adam/assets/95468392/35263e3f-6fd1-48e3-a21d-c773735bfb1a)

::: {.flushright data-latex=""}
April 12, 2024
:::

Food and Drug Administration
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research 5901-B Ammendale Road
Beltsville, MD 20705-1266

Re: Response to FDA’s Statistical Review and Evaluation Summary of the R Consortium R submission Pilot 3 eCTD submission

Dear Sir/Madam:

On February 2, 2024, the R Consortium R submission Working Group received FDA’s Statistical Review and Evaluation Summary of the R Consortium R submission Pilot 3 submission. The working group would like to thank FDA staff for the comprehensive review and thoughtful recommendations. We are thrilled to learn that the FDA staff was able to reproduce the ADaM (Analysis Data Model) datasets as well as the analysis outputs using the R programs and the proprietary R package submitted through the eCTD portal.

The purpose of this letter is to provide the working group’s responses to FDA’s Statistical Review and Evaluation Summary of the R Consortium R submission Pilot 3. The following information is provided in response to the findings from FDA Staff’s review :

{{< pagebreak >}}

[**Agency Comment 1**]{.underline}

> The agency found issues switching between R versions. The FDA would like the wg \[working group\] to explore the impact of different versions of R, RStudio and RTools, as well as Linux vs. Windows

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The agency found issues switching between R versions. The FDA would like the WG \[Working Group\] to explore the impact of different versions of R, RStudio and RTools, as well as Linux vs. Windows
```

[**The R Consortium R Submission Working Group Response**]{.underline}

> It is recommended by the Working group to download and install the R and R Studio versions specified in the ADRG. Switching to other versions, not specified, could most likely be the cause of issues when running the R ADaM and analysis output programs. Certain versions of the R packages used in these analysis programs only correspond to the specified R version.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It is recommended by the WG to download and install the R and R Studio versions specified in the ADRG. Switching to other versions, not specified, could most likely be the cause of issues when running the R ADaM and analysis output programs. Certain versions of the R packages used in these analysis programs only correspond to the specified R version.
```

Regarding RTools, referencing the installation instructions on its website,

*"Rtools42 is only needed for installation of R packages from source or building R from source. R can be installed from the R binary installer and by default will install binary versions of CRAN packages, which does not require Rtools42.*

*Moreover, online build services are available to check and build R packages for Windows, for which again one does not need to install Rtools42 locally. The Winbuilder check service uses identical setup as the CRAN incomming packages checks and has already all CRAN and Bioconductor packages pre-installed."*^1^

> As discussed in the R Consortium R Submission working group, *"It appears that the most practical path forward as to what preemptive measures sponsors can take to match submission environments with the FDA test environment is to work with the FDA to lock down the environment as best as can be done just prior to submission."*^2^

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As discussed in the R Consortium R Submission Working Group, *"It appears that the most practical path forward as to what preemptive measures sponsors can take to match submission environments with the FDA test environment is to work with the FDA to lock down the environment as best as can be done just prior to submission."*^2^
```

Reviewer 3: Also - shoudl we just remove "It appears that" at the beginning of the sentence and just say "The most practical..."

Reviewer 2: Fine to leave as I'm quoting the meeting minutes here . 
![image](https://github.com/RConsortium/submissions-pilot3-adam/assets/95468392/92c2fcf9-6557-4c4d-a3a4-b53d6566de89)

[**The R Consortium R Submission Working Group Response**]{.underline}

The Pilot 3 project team explored all differences between the original CDISC datasets generated in SAS vs the Pilot 3 datasets generated in R. More detailed findings are documented in the ADRG in the section 'QC findings'. To address the agency's concerns, we explored these specific discrepancies that are present that could impact the analysis results.

The team used three different packages:

```         
  library(arsenal)
  library(diffdf)
  library(waldo)
  
  path <- list(sdtm = "~/submissions-pilot3-adam/submission/sdtm",
               adam = "~/submissions-pilot3-adam/submission/adam",
               cdisc = "~/submissions-pilot3-adam/adam")
```

***ADSL***

```         
adsl <- read_xpt(file.path(path$adam, "adsl.xpt"))  
adsl_cdisc <- read_xpt(file.path(path$cdisc, "adsl.xpt"))

arsenal::comparedf(adsl, adsl_cdisc)
diffdf::diffdf(adsl, adsl_cdisc, keys = c("STUDYID", "USUBJID"))
waldo::compare(adsl, x_arg = "old", adsl_cdisc, y_arg = "new")

`attr(old, 'label')` is a character vector ('Subject-Level Analysis Dataset')

> `attr(new, 'label')` is absent

Reviewer 2: I agree, @bms63 that further clarification for each dataset check could be helpful.  @SHAESEN2 could you add a short sentence clarification on what each check is looking at?  Feel free to update the .qmd.

> `attr(new, 'label')` is absent

Reviewer 2: @bms63 . I'll have @SHAESEN2 respond to your first question.

As for the second question, most of these checks are described in the appendix of the ADRG in Appendix 2.  As for ADSL specifically, the appendix mentions that the there was no difference in ADSL (Pilot 3) vs ADSL (CDISC), including any attributes.  No impact to analysis essentially. Also @SHAESEN2 , does have a conlusion paragraph at the end explaining overall there is no impact with any of the discrepancies found between Pilot 3 vs CDISC ADaMs.

> `attr(new, 'label')` is absent

Reviewer 2: @kaz462  to add a link to a reference regarding the missing values between SAS and R.

> `attr(new, 'label')` is absent

Reviewer: https://bayer-group.github.io/sas2r/r-and-sas-syntax.html#handling-of-missing-values

> `attr(new, 'label')` is absent

Reviewer: Maybe we can add another reference link about the difference between `NA` and `NULL`: https://www.r-bloggers.com/2010/04/r-na-vs-null/

> `attr(new, 'label')` is absent

Reviewer 2: added link.

```
{{< pagebreak >}}

***ADTTE***

```         
adtte <- read_xpt(file.path(path$adam, "adtte.xpt"))
adtte_cdisc <- read_xpt(file.path(path$cdisc, "adtte.xpt"))

arsenal::comparedf(adtte, adtte_cdisc)
diffdf::diffdf(adtte, adtte_cdisc, keys = c("STUDYID", "USUBJID")) 
waldo::compare(adtte, x_arg = "old", adtte_cdisc, y_arg = "new")

  ================================================
   VARIABLE  ATTR_NAME   VALUES.BASE  VALUES.COMP 
  ------------------------------------------------
     AGE     format.sas     NULL           3      
    AGEGR1   format.sas     NULL          $5      
   AGEGR1N   format.sas     NULL           3      
   EVNTDESC  format.sas     NULL          $25     
    PARAM    format.sas     NULL          $32     
   PARAMCD   format.sas     NULL          $4      
     RACE    format.sas     NULL          $32     
    RACEN    format.sas     NULL           3      
    SAFFL    format.sas     NULL          $1      
     SEX     format.sas     NULL          $1      
  ------------------------------------------------
```

{{< pagebreak >}}

> ***ADAE***

Reviewer 2: Going back to the ADRG, this is explained in Appendix 2. 
![image](https://github.com/RConsortium/submissions-pilot3-adam/assets/95468392/a8dc007b-7135-44fc-8eb3-85d5b9f5dc1d)

Maybe, @SHAESEN2 , it would be good to just copy the QC findings descriptions from the ADRG under each check shown here.  Maybe even paraphrased into one sentence.  Then at the end in the conclusion paragraph, you can add a note, "For further details, on each of these checks please refer to Appendix 2 QC Findings in the ADRG.". This could help clarify in this response letter.

    TRTSDT      Date      numeric   
  ----------------------------------
```

{{< pagebreak >}}

***ADADAS***

```         
adadas <- read_xpt(file.path(path$adam, "adadas.xpt"))
adadas_cdisc <- read_xpt(file.path(path$cdisc, "adadas.xpt"))

arsenal::comparedf(adadas, adadas_cdisc)
diffdf::diffdf(adadas, adadas_cdisc, keys = c("STUDYID", "USUBJID", "QSSEQ", 
"PARAMCD", "AVISIT"))
waldo::compare(adadas, x_arg = "old", adadas_cdisc, y_arg = "new")

========================================================================================
VARIABLE  ATTR_NAME            VALUES.BASE                     VALUES.COMP            
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ANL01FL    label            Analysis Flag 01             Analysis Record Flag 01      
ITTFL      label    Intent-To-Treat Population Flag  Intent-to-Treat Population Flag 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
```

Any observed difference in variables is documented in QC findings, including NA versus NULL which we did not encounter. Any observed difference in attribute will not affect the analysis.

> In conclusion, the team was unable to identify any differences that could have an impact on the analysis.

Reviewer 3: I think we should re-iterate that all these findings are metadata related and have no impact on the analysis

Reviewer 2: @SHAESEN2 and @bms63 ,  let me know what you think of the suggestion.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In conclusion, the discrepancies found between the Pilot 3 vs the CDISC ADaMs were all metadata related. The team was unable to identify any of these issues impacting the analysis.
```

Reviewer 2: @laxamanaj will move the respnse paragraph to the top, then update so that it has this wording.

> In conclusion, the team was unable to identify any differences that could have an impact on the analysis.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In conclusion, the discrepancies found between the Pilot 3 vs the CDISC ADaMs were all metadata related. The team was unable to identify any of these issues impacting the analysis.
```
